Course Syllabus for "PRDV251: HTML and CSS for Beginners "
----------------------------------------------------------

This course provides students with an introduction to the core
technologies used to communicate information on the Web: Hypertext
Markup Language (HTML) and Cascading Style Sheets (CSS).  Whether
managing an employer's website, producing an online resume, or starting
a web-based business, knowing the fundamentals of how information is
structured and presented on the internet is a crucial skill for the
contemporary workplace. Today, many technologies exist to facilitate the
creation and management of websites, including development environments
like *Adobe Dreamweaver* and Content Management Systems like *WordPress*
and *Joomla!*  Even though mastery of the basics of HTML and CSS is
easily attainable, these labor-saving technologies have discouraged many
professionals from learning crucial coding skills.  With a basic
understanding of how HTML code is created and transformed, professionals
are better able to produce or transform websites according to precise
specifications, whether they use a fully-featured development
environment, a Content Management System, or write code from the
ground-up using a simple text editor. Moreover, these skills enable
professionals to troubleshoot minor problems and to intelligently
communicate with clients, collaborators, Information Technology staff
within a company, or outside contractors in order to maintain, modify,
or produce complicated web-based projects.

### Learning Outcomes

Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to:

-   Edit, modify, or transform existing HTML documents and CSS style
    sheets to produce specified outputs.
-   Correct syntax errors in HTML documents and CSS style sheets.
-   Simplify unnecessarily complex HTML or CSS code.
-   Write syntactically and stylistically correct HTML documents and CSS
    style sheets.
-   Explain why best coding practices demand the abstraction of
    presentational instructions from semantic information.
-   Identify the situations in which it is permissible to use deprecated
    or stylistically incorrect HTML code.
-   Identify and explain situations when HTML and CSS require
    supplemental technologies to perform specified tasks.
-   Recognize and identify Server Side Includes, JavaScript, and PHP in
    existing HTML documents.
-   Correctly define and use fundamental terms and concepts related to
    web development.

### Course Requirements

In order to take this course, you must:  
  
 √    Have access to a computer.  
  
 √    Have continuous broadband Internet access.  
  
 √    Have the ability/permission to install plug-ins or software (e.g.
Adobe Reader or Flash).  
  
 √    Have the ability to download and save files and documents to a
computer.  
  
 √    Have the ability to open Microsoft files and documents (.doc,
.ppt, .xls, etc.).  
  
 √    Have competency in the English language.  
  
 √    Have read the [Saylor Student
Handbook](http://www.saylor.org/site/wp-content/uploads/2012/05/Saylor-StudentHandbook.pdf).  
  
 √    Have software capable of editing plain text-formatted files (e.g.
Notepad, Textedit, Gedit, or Vim; NOTE: students may want to install
free and open-source software with convenient features for editing and
creating HTML and CSS files,
e.g. [Bluefish](http://bluefish.openoffice.nl/), [Notepad
X](http://notepad-x.sourceforge.net/),
or [Notepad++](http://notepad-plus-plus.org/)).

### Course Information

Welcome to HTML and CSS for Beginners.  General information on this
course and its requirements can be found below.  This course is
appropriate for beginners who are comfortable navigating the Internet,
but want to learn to write or maintain websites for personal use or for
a small business.  
  
 **Primary Resources:** This course will direct you to a range of
different free, online materials that our consulting professors have
carefully selected for you.  
  
 **Requirements for Completion:** In order to complete this course, you
will need to work through each unit and all of its assigned materials. 
You will need to look closely at provided code snippets and example lab
materials and experiment with them using your browser and editor. 
Finally, you will need to develop example code and an example website
using the illustrated techniques to successfully complete the course.
 Units 1-4 lay the groundwork for coding in HTML and CSS, while Unit 5
focuses on HTML and CSS as part of a great ecology of technologies
underlying contemporary websites.  
    
 Please note that you will only receive an official grade on your Final
Exam.  However, in order to adequately prepare for this exam and develop
the skills required to create simple websites, you will need to work
through the coding assignments and activities associated with
readings.  
 In order to pass this course, you will need to earn a 70% or higher on
the Final Exam.  Your score on the exam will be tabulated as soon as you
complete it.  If you do not pass the exam, you may take it again.  
    
 **Time Commitment:** This course should take you approximately **30
hours** to complete; however, the class will be most rewarding if you
continue to develop the example website into a presentable part of your
portfolio.  Since some websites require more complex designs than others
and creating presentable websites can sometimes require a long process
of modifications and revisions, this example website may take longer to
complete than the course itself.  Each unit includes a “time advisory”
that lists the amount of time you are expected to spend on each
subunit.  It may be useful to take a look at these time advisories and
determine how much time you have over the next few weeks to complete
each unit and to then set goals for yourself.  Units are of variable
length, between about 5 and 7 hours.  Different students will find
learning to think through the markup process easy or difficult depending
on temperament, experience, and environment; generally, however, it is
best to break learning up in to smaller blocks of time, as the
terminology and syntax can sometimes be overwhelming in study periods of
more than two hours.  Perhaps you can sit down with your calendar and
decide to complete subunit 1.1-1.1.6 (1.55 hours) on Monday night;
subunit 1.2-1.3.3 (1.85 hours) on Tuesday night; subunits 1.4-1.4.4 (1.8
hours) on Wednesday night; etc.  
    
 **Tips/Suggestions:** There are many forums and tutorials online beyond
those immediately linked in this course that can help you if you get
stuck.  Keep in mind that for any given specified output, there may be
several ways of coding HTML and CSS.  While the material at
[www.w3schools.com](http://www.w3schools.com) is often too schematic to
learn HTML and CSS alone, the interactive “Try it Yourself” activities
on that website can be invaluable if you get stuck or are having a hard
time figuring out how something works.
